Onboarding: Intermediate lectures (+ runnable Aiken and Mesh examples) (#1951)
cardano-foundation/developer-portal: docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/7-parameters.md

---
title: "Parameters"
sidebar_label: "Parameters"
description: "A value built into the contract's own code before it has an address, fixed earlier than anything the validator is handed, which is why changing it changes the address."
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock";
import extractRegion from "@site/src/utils/extractRegion";
import VaultAiken from "!!raw-loader!@site/examples/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/vault/on-chain/aiken/validators/vault.ak";

# Parameters

> The last two lectures finished the list of what a validator is **given**: the **[datum and the redeemer](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/datum-and-redeemer)**, then the **[context](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/transaction-context)**. Nothing else is handed to a validator when it runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last two lectures finished the list of what a validator is **given**: the **[datum and the redeemer](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/datum-and-redeemer)**, then the **[context](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/transaction-context)**. Nothing else is handed to a validator **when it runs**.
```

A **parameter** is not on that list. It is a value built into the contract's own code, before the contract ever reaches the chain. Compiling leaves a **blank** where the value goes, and the contract is finished by filling that blank in. A parameter is baked **into** the validator, which is why you will never find it in `validator(datum, redeemer, context)`.

> Of the values **you** supply, the useful way to tell them apart is **when the value is fixed**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of the values **you** supply, the useful way to tell them apart is **when the value is provided**:
```

> | | Fixed when | Lives in | To change it |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| | Provided at | Lives in | To change it |
```

|---|---|---|---|
| **parameter** | build time | the contract itself | fill the blank differently: a new contract, at a **new address** |
| **datum** | lock time | the locked UTxO | lock a new UTxO |
| **redeemer** | spend time | the spending transaction | just send a different one |

The context is missing from that table on purpose. It is the transaction itself, settled by whoever builds the spend, rather than a value you choose and pass.

> ## Why the vault wants one

Reviewer: Same as when we talked about tests. We'll show the code and reasoning for the valut on the "Try it" lecture, so here we should have very simple examples like:

```ak
validator guesser(guess: Int) {
  spend(
    datum: Option<Data>,
    redeemer: Int,
    _own_ref: OutputReference,
    _self: Transaction,
  ) {
   redeemer == guess
  }
}
```

Just an example. But with something like this, we explain that we can create a validator that unlocks if you can guess a number we provided as a parameter and that you can provide the number as a redeemer. The `guess` is fixed for all UTxOs, so once a person guesses correctly, every UTxO in that address will be unlocked with the same number. So, you have to re-apply a new number every time.

They don't need to actually write the code or run it. This is a mental exercise to understand the concept. Then, on "Try it", they actually write the code for the vault.

Think about the vault so far. It releases funds to one owner, proven by one signature. Lose that key and the funds are gone for good, with nobody to ask for help. So we add a **backup key**: a second key, chosen when the vault is made, that can also take the funds out. The owner uses their key for normal spending. The backup is kept somewhere safe and is not touched until it is needed.

> Here are all three ways in, in one small contract:

Reviewer: All three ways?

The redeemer finally matters. Here it picks which rule applies, and each choice needs a different signature.

## Why a parameter changes the address

A parameter is part of the contract's code, so it changes the compiled bytes, which changes the **hash**. And the hash is the **address**. One piece of source, two recovery keys, two separate vaults:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    S["the recovery vault<br/>one source file"] -->|"compile<br/>once"| C["`the contract with a **blank**
    where recovery goes
    _no address yet_`"]
    C -->|"fill it in:<br/>recovery = aaaa…aa"| A["`one script hash
    **addr_test1wrzptf…**`"]
    C -->|"fill it in:<br/>recovery = bbbb…bb"| B["`a different script hash
    **addr_test1wpc707…**`"]
```

The two addresses have nothing in common, and that is the reason to use a parameter at all.

Anyone can read the recovery key straight out of the contract. That is fine, because it is a public key **hash**, the same kind of value the datum holds. It names *who* may recover, and naming somebody is not the same as being them: taking the funds still needs a **signature** from that key, and only its owner can produce one.

## Why not the datum

> Every vault would share one address, and each locked UTxO would carry its own recovery key, hidden inside until you opened it. Two UTxOs sitting side by side could have completely different backup keys and look identical. As a parameter, the key is part of the address, so a different key means a different address, and the address alone tells you which key can recover.

Reviewer: This was very confusing, and I think it missed the point because we didn't previously explain why we added a recovery key. Based on what I read, the same user has both keys, but last time we talked about this, we decided to frame it as "the company that manages the protocol has the recovery keys". That way, it'd work like a bank, where the bank can unlock your funds if you forget your password or credit card PIN. **In that scenario**, it makes sense that the recovery key is the same for all users because it's the protocol's keys. Do you want to go with that, or change it to a different story because having someone else be able to take the money kinda goes against crypto philosophy?

Reviewer: Other stories  would be fine too, but I think we need to provide a clear story/reasoning for why having the recovery key as a parameter is beneficial. If both are the user's keys, then there's no reason to have them as parameters. It could go in the datum, and you could have a single `Unlock` redeemer that checks if **either** pkh is present.

**[Datum & redeemer](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/datum-and-redeemer)** left you a rule for choosing between the datum and the redeemer. A parameter sits above both of them, and the question it answers is different:

- **Parameter** for settings fixed when the contract is deployed, the same for every UTxO at that address: a recovery key, an oracle's address, a token policy.
- **Datum** for facts that differ from one locked UTxO to the next.

Ask "is this the same for every UTxO at this address?" first. If yes, it is a parameter. Only if no do you go back to the datum or redeemer question.

> There is one more thing you could do, and it is worse. You could simply **write the recovery key into the code**. It would be just as fixed and just as safe. But then every new vault needs a change to the contract itself, which means compiling it again, testing it again, and having it audited again. With a parameter you compile and test **once**, and each deployment only passes a different value in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is one more thing you could do. You could simply **write the recovery key into the code**. It would be just as fixed and just as safe. But then every new vault protocol needs a change to the contract itself, which means compiling it again, testing it again, and having it audited again. With a parameter, you compile, test, and audit **once**, and each deployment only passes a different value in.
```

Where that key is named follows the rule above: a parameter when it is fixed for the whole deployment, the datum when it differs from one UTxO to the next, as the oracle's does.
:::

## What "filling the blank" actually involves

The **datum** goes on the output when you lock. The **redeemer** goes in the spending transaction. The **parameter** is applied before either exists, to the compiled script itself.

Filling the blank does not compile anything and does not ask the network for anything. Your off-chain code takes the compiled script from your blueprint (`plutus.json`), with the blank still in it, supplies the missing value, and hashes what comes out. Two lines of ordinary code, and no transaction. **That is the whole of "deploying" a parameterized contract**, and you will write those two lines in **[frontend integration](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/frontend-integration)**.

> You will meet the word "deploy" in one other sense, though. It also describes putting the script into a UTxO, so that later transactions point at it instead of carrying a copy of it. That one really is a transaction, and it is optional: a way to make every spend smaller, not a step you must take before a contract works. **Reference inputs & scripts** does it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will meet the word "deploy" in one other sense, though. It also describes putting the script into a UTxO, so that later transactions point at it instead of carrying a copy of it. That one really is a transaction, and it is optional: a way to make every spend smaller, not a step you must take before a contract works. **Reference inputs & scripts** explains it.
```

> This contract's `VaultAction` finally lists two choices, so its redeemers finally use both constructor numbers from **[datum & redeemer](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/datum-and-redeemer)**: `Unlock` is constructor 0 and `Recover` is constructor 1. Get those two the wrong way round later and the vault will look at the wrong key, without complaining.

Reviewer: The constructors are not explained in d&r anymore, so we should remove this paragraph

## Try it

**Give your vault a backup key.** It is the contract you already have plus one parameter and one extra action.

<Tabs groupId="onchain">
<TabItem value="aiken" label="Aiken" default>

Everything below runs from `on-chain/vault/`, where lecture 2 left you.

> Open `validators/vault.ak`. The redeemer changes first: `VaultAction` gains `Recover`, on the line after `Unlock`. The order matters, because it is what makes `Recover` constructor 1 off-chain, the `mConStr1([])` from **[datum & redeemer](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/datum-and-redeemer)**. `VaultDatum` does not move at all, the owner is still the one fact each locked UTxO carries.

Reviewer: The constructors are not explained in d&r anymore, so we should modify this paragraph

<CodeBlock language="aiken" title="validators/vault.ak">
  {extractRegion(VaultAiken, "types")}
</CodeBlock>

Then the validator itself. It takes the parameter in brackets after its name, `_redeemer` loses its underscore because the rule finally reads it, and the single line you wrote last lecture becomes a `when` with one branch per action. Both branches ask the same question: is this key among the signers? And differ only in which key they ask about: the datum's `owner` for `Unlock`, the parameter's `recovery` for `Recover`.

Both branches ask `list.has`, so there is nothing new to import.

<CodeBlock language="aiken" title="validators/vault.ak">
  {extractRegion(VaultAiken, "vault")}
</CodeBlock>

```bash
aiken check
```

> **It does not compile**, and the error is the lesson. Your two tests from **[testing](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/testing)** call `vault.spend` with four arguments, and the handler now takes five. A parameter always comes **first**, before the handler's own arguments, so every call has to gain a `recovery` in front:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**It compiles and type-checks, but it doesn't pass the tests**. Your two tests from **[testing](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/testing)** call `vault.spend` with four arguments, and the handler now takes five. A parameter always comes **first**, before the handler's own arguments, so every call has to gain a `recovery` in front:
```
